David Schaich (he): Okay, that should be the recording underway on a seasonal Monday morning in Liverpool.
I'm not surprised that
David Schaich (he): a few people have
David Schaich (he): decided not to brave the weather, and just sign in remotely.  But
David Schaich (he): do be sure to
David Schaich (he): speak up if there are questions, if the audio's not clear, things like that.
David Schaich (he): Let's quickly
David Schaich (he): pick up with the
David Schaich (he): recap of what we were looking at last week. It's been
David Schaich (he): most of a week since we dealt with the lecture material, though
David Schaich (he): the activities in the tutorial on Thursday will be
David Schaich (he): useful just a few minutes.
David Schaich (he): So what we've been looking at are
David Schaich (he): applications of the canonical ensemble that fixes the particle number and temperature in a statistical ensemble --- a collection of particles evolving through time
David Schaich (he): and probabilistically sampling all accessible microstates.  And before I go into all of that
David Schaich (he): I should remember to give you the 6-digit code:
David Schaich (he): code. 3, 6, 6, 3, 1, 3.
David Schaich (he): The specific example that we focus on last week, after considering the very simple spin system and seeing how its information content
David Schaich (he): had observable physical effects in terms of the internal energy as well as the
David Schaich (he): entropy, we looked at
David Schaich (he): the classica, non-relativistic, non-interacting or ideal gas,
David Schaich (he): where the energies of the micro-states depend on continuously varying quantities: The momenta of the particles.
David Schaich (he): This required that
David Schaich (he): the usual some of the microstates that we have defining the partition function
David Schaich (he): of the system
David Schaich (he): needs to be regulated, made sensible. So take the limit. We're only discrete moment to our economics that we discrete them into our accessible, and then the limit where those become continuous.
David Schaich (he): that partition function. or
David Schaich (he): equivalently it's more on the
David Schaich (he): is our starting point. It becomes
David Schaich (he): an integral over those
David Schaich (he): continuous momentum.
David Schaich (he): If the energy is dependent on other variables, like position as well, so we have some traffic potential or external electric field that
David Schaich (he): I gave a position dependent energy to the particles we would have to integrate over positions as well as and from the partition function, or almost 300. The starting point
David Schaich (he): we we're able to derive the internal energies
David Schaich (he): in entropy
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): both cases of
David Schaich (he): distinguishable and indistinguishable particles in the gas. and we will pick up right now, Bye. looking in detail or more detail at
David Schaich (he): what the what the results we survived really me, or amount to of content, and then move on to look at
David Schaich (he): It's called the mixing entropy.
David Schaich (he): and then start looking at thermodynamic cycles, which is something that's all you may. Well, I've seen before I yieldcast all. I come to a cycle here. instead of just introducing these as
David Schaich (he): think this is coming out of nowhere for it as knowledge. We are
David Schaich (he): providing them and building them up from the microscopic dynamics of the many degrees of freedom in our statistical system. So
David Schaich (he): any questions about where we are plan for where we are headed
David Schaich (he): about your community. What's just go on to recall what we found.
David Schaich (he): How are you
David Schaich (he): internal interviews for
David Schaich (he): the case of both distinguishable? Yeah, I think, December, what particles oil down to
David Schaich (he): a very simple expression just 3 half times number of particles times the temperature
David Schaich (he): so. and here there is
David Schaich (he): no dependence on the information that we have about these particles
David Schaich (he): in this case, whether we can
David Schaich (he): label them and tell them apart, as they are bouncing around in the container in which we define
David Schaich (he): this gas. And
David Schaich (he): this is in contrast to
David Schaich (he): spin system that we looked at last week where there was a clear difference. And
David Schaich (he): just briefly, I mentioned something that you might want to convince yourself of. The reason for. This
David Schaich (he): is because the difference in the number of microstates between distinguishable and indistinguishable cases. For an ideal gas is
David Schaich (he): just that factor of one over n factorial. The number of different ways that particles can be enabled if they are.
David Schaich (he): See what your goal
David Schaich (he): and this one over N Factorial is
David Schaich (he): in the same
David Schaich (he): for all the energies or all the
David Schaich (he): which. if you look back to the work on spin systems was not the same. In that case the number of microstates for a given energy varied, depending on that energy.
David Schaich (he): And here difference between the distinguishable and indistinguishable internal energies
David Schaich (he): was different as a consequence
David Schaich (he): also mentioned in passing.
David Schaich (he): But this is also independent of the
David Schaich (he): volume which we will come back to when we get to the
David Schaich (he): I know gas law and the pressure
David Schaich (he): at the moment. We still have a few more derive results.
David Schaich (he): for we're coming from last week
David Schaich (he): where we looked at the entropy.
David Schaich (he): and we saw with those
David Schaich (he): did differ, and also depended on the volume
David Schaich (he): screen. So.
David Schaich (he): And you can an extra factor of. and in the denominator of this logarithm.
David Schaich (he): where that lambda th is the thermal double the wavelength
David Schaich (he): we can think of as
David Schaich (he): sort of volume that is occupied by each particle. But before going into that interpretation
David Schaich (he): it's interesting to ask
David Schaich (he): which of these entropies
David Schaich (he): is the larger one they'll give you away few seconds to consider that, and see if you are
David Schaich (he): willing to ship it out.
David Schaich (he): There you are an answer.
David Schaich (he): It is not immediately obvious just to look at them.
David Schaich (he): because there are 2 places where
David Schaich (he): these entropies differ in the costing factor on that first term proportional to N. As well as the factor of n that sneaks into the logarithmic term
David Schaich (he): question is, which of those winds, or do they go in the same direction
David Schaich (he): for large in?
David Schaich (he): And if we
David Schaich (he): consider the difference between them. the indistinguishable entropy minus the distinguishable entropy.
David Schaich (he): Then 3 half of those 5 pads cancel off. We just one factor of 10,
David Schaich (he): and then everything but the year
David Schaich (he): and log one over N. And S. I cancels it out with the logarithmic factories.
David Schaich (he): The and I can pull out an overall negative sign to make that.
David Schaich (he): and then we can
David Schaich (he): recognize as
David Schaich (he): the negative of the startling, this approximation which we apply to get things into this form.
David Schaich (he): which is in the less than 0 approximation wide on that, and much greater than one as always. So
David Schaich (he): we are managing this. Yes, I it's less than Sd. and that
David Schaich (he): it reflects the extra information
David Schaich (he): that the
David Schaich (he): gives us. There's more that is knowable in principle about
David Schaich (he): There's more that's noble in principle, without the same triple particles
David Schaich (he): in the indistinguishable case where we don't have the option of labeling them
David Schaich (he): to stay
David Schaich (he): a couple more comments about the entropy use which I
David Schaich (he): started getting into before
David Schaich (he): asking this question, about which is larger.
David Schaich (he): So you can see that
David Schaich (he): depend on the volume quite clearly in that model with the connector.
David Schaich (he): and even more than that, they both depend on the specific combination
David Schaich (he): volume, time system will definitely wavelength to the minus third power.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): break that up into the linear length of the volume that we defined last week, divided by that we've mine. you and
David Schaich (he): the set up of a classical non-relativistic chaos
David Schaich (he): demands that this factor. The length of the volume, compared to the thermal wavelength
David Schaich (he): of particles, is much larger than what.
David Schaich (he): So I mentioned that so
David Schaich (he): you can think
David Schaich (he): this cube of the thermal wave life
David Schaich (he): as
David Schaich (he): occupied volume of the particles. and from the entropy we can see that
David Schaich (he): things get dangerous when that occupied large or comparable to this total volume of the system. What do I mean? Dangerous
David Schaich (he): I to
David Schaich (he): It's Entropy's are still visible. Consider it.
David Schaich (he): If that
David Schaich (he): thermal volume
David Schaich (he): comparable to, or even larger than the physical volume
David Schaich (he): in which our canonical system is maintained. Then it is
David Schaich (he): large enough. The factor in these logarithms becomes less than one. The longer. Those themselves become negative.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): at least in the limits where that's
David Schaich (he): longer than become as it's. Argument goes to 0, the algorithm diverges to negative infinity. So at some point it will overwhelm that pre-factor and lead to
David Schaich (he): a negative entropy.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): you should
David Schaich (he): be able to see is actually nonsensical. and
David Schaich (he): I can't see that just
David Schaich (he): from the general definition of the energy, something over all, like an entropy, something over a microstate with that negative sign
David Schaich (he): the probability Pi times the log of pi.
David Schaich (he): all of those pi's are less than, or equal to one
David Schaich (he): greater than or equal to 0. So
David Schaich (he): and in general, you know, we can only have a probability equals one. Where there's a single micro state.
David Schaich (he): In general the probabilities are less than one, so that logarithm is negative, cancel out the overall negative.
David Schaich (he): we have a sum of strictly positive quantities. So a negative entropy is not
David Schaich (he): physical.
David Schaich (he): And what has happened here is that
David Schaich (he): our assumption of working with the classical.
David Schaich (he): And all this the guess broken down.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): you recall that this
David Schaich (he): Beverly wavelengths and all consider the square case to get rid of it media
David Schaich (he): square root that we have on the way. This is pranks constant squared times, pi squared over twice the mass times the temperature.
David Schaich (he): and when this becomes large is what either the mass or the temperature become small compared to H bar squared.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): break down, either in a little bit of small mass which
David Schaich (he): it's, it's become important. or, in particular.
David Schaich (he): if we have low temperatures
David Schaich (he): that would lead to that, each part
David Schaich (he): squared, times high squared, being
David Schaich (he): larger than, or even comparable to too high. Sorry to Mt. There's also an L squared
David Schaich (he): coming into the comparison
David Schaich (he): between
David Schaich (he): the volume and this occupied.
David Schaich (he): so you will see in a few weeks after we're done. Applying the
David Schaich (he): canonical ensemble to
David Schaich (he): equations of states and thermodynamic cycles. When we consider low temperatures, you will have to
David Schaich (he): adapt some of our assumptions, and in particular introduce quantum effects which I emphasize You don't need to be familiar with it all. I'm going to.
David Schaich (he): I
David Schaich (he): introduce all aspects of it. Awesome physics like will develop within that low temperature regime.
David Schaich (he): So that is the
David Schaich (he): main physical performance and comparisons between the distinguishable and indistinguishable
David Schaich (he): cases of ideal gases that we
David Schaich (he): ran out of time for last Tuesday. and just pause to check for any questions that this might have inspired before moving on to
David Schaich (he): the next aspect of ideal gases we will consider
David Schaich (he): I'll seem happy with yeah
David Schaich (he): conceptual lessons extracted from those a mathematical calculations.
David Schaich (he): So let's
David Schaich (he): to generalize the economical ensemble, set up just a bit kind of like we did with
David Schaich (he): the microcanical ensemble when we introduced the temperature and looked at heat exchange
David Schaich (he): to check that that temperature behaved sensibly.
David Schaich (he): Zoom all the way out there. To get to this illustration on the screen.
David Schaich (he): you will consider a an analogous 3 stage process involving 2 canonical subsystems now.
David Schaich (he): where you initially have them.
David Schaich (he): just for simplicity, with the same
David Schaich (he): temperature, the same number of particles.
David Schaich (he): We have 2 canonical systems. We'll make it a and Omega B. Which have
David Schaich (he): some number of particles in a given volume that will also keep to be the same between those 2 systems for simplicity.
David Schaich (he): And then we say that those
David Schaich (he): 2 systems share a wall that we can remove allow
David Schaich (he): particles to shift from one side of the system to the other. and then, after some time the system has re thermalized. We will reinsert that walls. We get a
David Schaich (he): combined system, Omega, c. And then, re inserting the wall. We get back to some omega, a prime. you know, make a B prime.
David Schaich (he): which again have well. The temperature is always the same as an intensive quality.
these thermal equilibrium systems
David Schaich (he): in the combined system. We need to analyze things in terms of twice the number of particles
David Schaich (he): that can freely explore
David Schaich (he): twice the volume
David Schaich (he): of those 2 systems combined. and then we, the Wall. gets us back to
David Schaich (he): just one factor of the volume. Each of these re separated systems
David Schaich (he): and some number of particles on each side, and the question is.
okay.
David Schaich (he): pretty drawn here in blue. What happens to the entropy as we
David Schaich (he): go through these steps, allow the system to evolve the time in this way, and we want to see that
David Schaich (he): our mathematical description of particles in terms of the economic.
David Schaich (he): the second ball from dynamics
David Schaich (he): that we derive a similar consideration a few weeks ago.
David Schaich (he): so that we haven't gone off the rails
David Schaich (he): in the way that we are analyzing things. Yeah. yeah.
David Schaich (he): We heard this as
David Schaich (he): mixing these particles in these 2 different systems zoom back in
David Schaich (he): to make a bit more legible on the screen
David Schaich (he): if it focuses.
David Schaich (he): So this is actually just the the question that was
David Schaich (he): on the screen at the start of the class which most of you on zoom may only have seen for a measures. So once I remember, to
David Schaich (he): share screen.
David Schaich (he): and that
David Schaich (he): running down the setup gives you a chance to think about. Consider that question.
David Schaich (he): So what happens
David Schaich (he): from? We have those 2 canonical systems, both in from equilibrium with the same temperature? T.
David Schaich (he): You combine them to get that overall combined system, and then
David Schaich (he): we separate them into
David Schaich (he): systems will make a a prime, and they'll make a B prime. And the entropy
David Schaich (he): that we have in each case is an extensive quantity, so just adds across those subsystems when they are not combined.
David Schaich (he): that goes to the combined entropy. And then we have an essay crime
David Schaich (he): plus Sv. Prime, adding across that we separated systems.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): we first consider the case of indistinguishable particles.
David Schaich (he): and then we can compute
David Schaich (he): at least a few of these entropies
David Schaich (he): just based on the what we did last Tuesday, and just reviewed in the last few minutes.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): s a. And Sv. Because
David Schaich (he): for simplicity, we gave them the same volume in the same number of particles.
David Schaich (he): That is all that the
David Schaich (he): and the same temperature that goes into the
David Schaich (he): thermal wavelength. Those 3 quantities are all that
David Schaich (he): the individual entropy
David Schaich (he): depends on it. It's a reminder. This was 5 haves
David Schaich (he): and plus n log of the following name over end. Times. The thermal way of life that depends on the temperature. which is easy map to
David Schaich (he): It's distributed that factor of 2 across those 2 terms.
David Schaich (he): And that's similarly we have only a single system of individual articles. but there are 2 end of them.
David Schaich (he): and twice the volume. Still at the same temperature we get to the
David Schaich (he): middle stage
David Schaich (he): of this process.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): this gives us
David Schaich (he): that 5 has times 2, and that
David Schaich (he): plus that 2 N. Logan
David Schaich (he): twice the volume over
David Schaich (he): to N. Wavelength cube.
David Schaich (he): which again we split up into that cancel all into 5 and plus 2, and boy to this cancel the over. And
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): you see that upon
David Schaich (he): removing the wall between those 2 initial systems a and B.
David Schaich (he): Nothing happens in terms of the entropy. It just stays the same as it was.
David Schaich (he): So this is consistent with the
David Schaich (he): second law of thermodynamics. The entropy has not decreased.
David Schaich (he): even though it has not increased. The second law allows the entropy to stay the same as time goes on.
David Schaich (he): Perhaps a sharper question now is. what happens to the entropy when we re inserted that all in reset rates the systems.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): the complication at this stage that makes things a bit more interesting is that even though I draw on that in the systems a prime at B point here at the end.
David Schaich (he): the same number of particles on each side that we started off with.
David Schaich (he): Initially.
David Schaich (he): there's no guarantee that that actually happens when we re insert a wall with a fixed position. As those particles are bouncing around the larger combined volume.
David Schaich (he): It's entirely possible that different numbers of particles could end up on either side of the wall. Just in the same way, in the
David Schaich (he): heat exchange example of the micro canonical system, we saw
David Schaich (he): the possibility of different amounts of energy.
David Schaich (he): and they go
David Schaich (he): in either of the micro canonical systems. I'll say where we separated after being put in the thermal contact and the latitude
David Schaich (he): exchange energy.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): if we want to compute the entropy of those re separated systems.
David Schaich (he): we need it
David Schaich (he): some over all possible
David Schaich (he): particle divisions.
David Schaich (he): I'll say that if we have new particles.
David Schaich (he): and that system essay prime
David Schaich (he): on the left.
David Schaich (he): Then there must be 2 in minus new particles in the other system on the right.
David Schaich (he): so that the total which is conserved throughout this whole process remains to
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): one. But if we again think back to the heated shape example. when we combine the systems. We asked about the number of microstates, and then from that we got the entropy for a microcanonical system in thermal equilibrium.
David Schaich (he): Now, with the canonical system. We have to start with the partition function.
David Schaich (he): And you need to do this
David Schaich (he): when computing
David Schaich (he): the partition function.
David Schaich (he): that from which we then
David Schaich (he): derive
David Schaich (he): that final entropy of the re separated systems.
David Schaich (he): And as for that micro canonical case
David Schaich (he): where the number of microstates in the combined system was the product of the possible microstates. In each of the 2 subsystems
David Schaich (he): the efficient function, the overall system
David Schaich (he): is going to be the product
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): the partition functions for
David Schaich (he): each of those 2 subsystems.
David Schaich (he): Is it a prime with new particles?
David Schaich (he): It's multiplied by so P. Prime with 2 N. Minus new particles.
David Schaich (he): This partition function is
David Schaich (he): something that we computed last Tuesday. We can just
David Schaich (he): plug in that result.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the call that we are working with interesting from our articles, at least for the moment.
David Schaich (he): One has new particles. temperature to you.
David Schaich (he): You know there is
David Schaich (he): 2 and minus new and the same willing that temperature.
David Schaich (he): So that is one over new factorial. because we cannot distinguish between the different labeling of those new particles. The single particle partition function was just
David Schaich (he): the volume of the system over its occupied, for you raised to the power of the number of particles.
David Schaich (he): and then we have exactly the same factors
David Schaich (he): for 2, and minus new particles.
David Schaich (he): in place of just the new particles from the other system. So this is really easy to combine. You have a new factorial to N. Minus new factorial.
David Schaich (he): And then
David Schaich (he): this volume ratio to the factor to the power new, and this is off with a minus
David Schaich (he): and only
David Schaich (he): lambda cube to the power to n is left.
David Schaich (he): Now, that's for a single division of particles to do on one side to and
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): out this.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): that you said it was necessary
David Schaich (he): going to give us
David Schaich (he): that final combined system.
David Schaich (he): maybe a. For something to be some over all possible values that we could have
David Schaich (he): no particles at all in the right hand side of all. Sorry in the left hand side, all of them right
David Schaich (he): going all the way through the other extreme, where all the particles are on the left, and none of them are in the right, so you equals to end.
David Schaich (he): There is
David Schaich (he): the expression we need to sum over
David Schaich (he): this: the over Lambda queue
David Schaich (he): power to end is independence of new. What gets left in the some
David Schaich (he): is that
David Schaich (he): combination of factorials which actually looks a bit like we would get from a binomial coefficients. You recall that the binomial coefficient. So if we choose any particles out of 2 and total.
David Schaich (he): that is
David Schaich (he): 2 and factorial over you, factorial
David Schaich (he): to n minus new factorial.
David Schaich (he): So we can rearrange this, pull out our
David Schaich (he): substitute that I know your coefficients into this expression. Yeah, they
David Schaich (he): difference of one over 2 n factorial and then some over new from 0 to 2, and of those binomial coefficients 2, and choose new.
David Schaich (he): that some is Sol. You can give an expression for it.
David Schaich (he): And if we
David Schaich (he): just leave things as they are right now, and it look at the
David Schaich (he): resulting entropy
David Schaich (he): s prime, which is that some of the
David Schaich (he): what SSD. Prime. This is the derivative with respect to the temperature of the negative.
David Schaich (he): it's you
David Schaich (he): Z. Prime
David Schaich (he): in the year
David Schaich (he): as the function whose derivative we need to take, because the entropy.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): breaking up that logarithm of these 3 factors being multiplied together into the sum or difference of
David Schaich (he): 3 logarithms.
David Schaich (he): we have a 2, and coming down
David Schaich (he): you derivative of at
David Schaich (he): Boy the over.
David Schaich (he): Then the queued. We need to remember that that Lambda cube has a factor of the temperature within it. It's not just a constant, so it's not trivial
David Schaich (he): derivative in there.
David Schaich (he): The other terms are independent of the temperature, so we can take the derivative that just gets rid of that overall factor of temperature that comes in the definition of the entropy.
David Schaich (he): We have one over 2 n factorial
David Schaich (he): much we can.
David Schaich (he): This is the log of 2 n factorial with negative sign. And then, finally, this one help the complicated some over new of the binomial coefficients
David Schaich (he): to and choose new. So this is
David Schaich (he): kind of a awkward expression. complicated logarithm of
David Schaich (he): which is hard to compare with
David Schaich (he): the entropy that we had when we first 2 stages. This is just n plus a Pm. Again
David Schaich (he): term.
David Schaich (he): and what we can do is bring to bear some of the work we did in the tutorial last Thursday, where we
David Schaich (he): consider these sorts of entropies problem. 2 systems that were combined.
David Schaich (he): and we saw.
David Schaich (he): and there, in that context, on Thursday we were looking at micro canonical systems.
David Schaich (he): but it also holds for canonical systems.
David Schaich (he): It's counting the number of microstates going into here, the partition function and the results and energy.
David Schaich (he): It is a general
David Schaich (he): result from the work that we did in the tutorial.
David Schaich (he): That's
David Schaich (he): essentially all i'll be in for you.
David Schaich (he): He's accounted for
David Schaich (he): from
David Schaich (he): the even division
David Schaich (he): of the degrees of freedom
David Schaich (he): between the 2 subsystems. So
David Schaich (he): whether we're looking at a distribution of energies from last Thursday, or the distribution of particles that we have here we have and a
David Schaich (he): equals, and the
David Schaich (he): which is equal to the end we started off with that is much larger than one. and
David Schaich (he): just this option, for the division of particles is going to dominate the entropy
David Schaich (he): of this final system, and that is actually the reason why
David Schaich (he): I went ahead and drew that sort of case here, even though the 6 particles being considered here, are not exactly
David Schaich (he): a very large number, we can imagine the usual tend to be power 23, where we saw that the
David Schaich (he): that one's on the entropy.
David Schaich (he): I mean from this sort of approximation we're accurate to
David Schaich (he): roughly one part of 10 to the 20. For all practical purposes it is the exact result
David Schaich (he): that the entropy is given
David Schaich (he): Bye. This specific case
David Schaich (he): out of the full sum over new. We just have to consider that case of new equals and half of the total number of 2 and particles.
David Schaich (he): and this approximation.
David Schaich (he): So this is an approximation
David Schaich (he): that's one that becomes exact in the so called aerodynamic limit, with the number of degrees of freedom
David Schaich (he): goes to infinity, and it immediately tells us that
David Schaich (he): this final system just involves the same number of individual particles in the same volume at the same temperature.
David Schaich (he): So we can just write down
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): final entropy and recognize that it is the same. Yes. the initial entropy.
David Schaich (he): and V, and T all the same. So we again get that
David Schaich (he): 5 n plus 2 n log V. Or N lay in the queue
David Schaich (he): which was equal to the interview of the combined system.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): we see in this three-stage, process, that, at least in terms of the energy in terms of the entropy.
David Schaich (he): There is essentially nothing dramatic happening. We can freely remove the whole separating these 2 containers. and then we insert it
David Schaich (he): and the entropy, the State is the same.
David Schaich (he): So this is
David Schaich (he): maybe the answer you came up with
David Schaich (he): before we got going today, when considering what would happen if we treated the air in this room
David Schaich (he): in the area of the hall. It's 2 canonical systems with
David Schaich (he): 10 to the power, 25 particles or so.
David Schaich (he): If we over the door between the hall of the room. nothing very dramatic happens. If we close it again
David Schaich (he): again. Nothing dramatic happens. We can previously
David Schaich (he): carry out that process of opening the door.
David Schaich (he): and just as freely close again
David Schaich (he): without
David Schaich (he): making a big change to
David Schaich (he): the overall entropy of the universe. So this sort of process where
David Schaich (he): we can reverse it. we
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): formally referred to as a reversible process for obvious reasons, and the course models in this case for the entropy of the process. The process does not change the entropy
David Schaich (he): of the systems that we have before it. After being analyzed
David Schaich (he): through the canonical ensemble or statistical.
David Schaich (he): so I may as well do the same
David Schaich (he): exercise for the
David Schaich (he): A, some distinguishable particles.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): here we go back to our illustration of this process. We imagine that we can
David Schaich (he): each of these particles labels ABC.
David Schaich (he): The E. And F. And keep track of how they
David Schaich (he): Which of these particles is, which, as they balance around it' be because over there
David Schaich (he): is over there. F is over there. and
David Schaich (he): once we re insert the wall, it will.
David Schaich (he): we will re insert it at just a certain time, where you can expect a similar number of particles to be
David Schaich (he): on either side of them all to be reinforced.
David Schaich (he): But there's no need for any of the labels to
that.
David Schaich (he): And now we on different size.
David Schaich (he): So what entropies do we get in this case?
David Schaich (he): Going through the similar sort of calculation now with
David Schaich (he): do you distinguishable entropy
David Schaich (he): coming in it' be in the same for one
David Schaich (he): We got a factor of 3 halves and the 2 cancelling off.
David Schaich (he): and then 2 and i'm the one of we over the landing cube. It's no factor in the log rhythm
David Schaich (he): in the combined system.
David Schaich (he): We have just a single with
David Schaich (he): 2 n and 2 be particles at the same temperature. So 3 halves times 2, and
David Schaich (he): plus that 2 n times the of 2 V
David Schaich (he): over. cute it. and if we
David Schaich (he): and i'll take the difference of those 2 expressions
David Schaich (he): going by the entropy later in time. minus the initial entropy. we started off with the 3 ends cancel. and
David Schaich (he): we can break out that log into a sum of logs, and all of those will cancel, except for that log of 2
David Schaich (he): that we have in the case of Fc. But not in the case of
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): the difference between the entropy, as time goes on is now non-zero level.
David Schaich (he): and, in fact, it is strictly positive, and it grows linearly with the number of particles and this becomes a very large number like 10 to the power 23
David Schaich (he): systems, with that
David Schaich (he): reasonable number of degrees of freedom. And
David Schaich (he): you refer to this non-zero difference between the combined entropy
David Schaich (he): at the interview of the initial set as this mixing energy mixing entropy.
David Schaich (he): don't say S. Some mix, and this, of course, is also
David Schaich (he): consistent with the second ball. In fact, it's maybe the what we
David Schaich (he): with an expected. Without doing the calculation we expect the entropy to increase this time goes on, except in very special
David Schaich (he): circumstances that involve those reversible processes.
David Schaich (he): Now, if we go back to the exercise of separating things. we, you take that same approximation that the entropy will be effectively all accounting for by.
David Schaich (he): and a prime equal to. and B prime.
David Schaich (he): But even number of particles on either side of the role in the we separated the system
David Schaich (he): that gives us, as above.
David Schaich (he): the final entropy. s a prime plus Sb. Prime, which was equal to
David Schaich (he): the initial entropy, and
David Schaich (he): therefore less than the entropy of the combined system.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): this argument is violating the second law of thermodynamics. It appears that the entropy has
David Schaich (he): decreased, as time is going on.
David Schaich (he): entropy in the final state s to be prime plus a prime. It's less than
David Schaich (he): that in the middle stage of this 3 stage process.
David Schaich (he): and this observation
David Schaich (he): it was under the name of the gives paradox.
David Schaich (he): Why is this analysis giving us a violation of the second law of thermodynamics? Can say, this? Is it
David Schaich (he): hope that gives paradox gives himself Not confused about this, he actually explained
David Schaich (he): why there is no paradox, and
David Schaich (he): we'll get to that explanation after a usual break pick up in 10min, just a minute or 2 before
David Schaich (he): the hour the check. Before I pause the
David Schaich (he): recording. You stretch your legs whether they're all right. Any questions about we mixing entropy the calculations you go through the
David Schaich (he): second half of the first half of today's lecture.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any. I'll get that. Okay, I think we can he's going again and resume with the
David Schaich (he): resolution of this
David Schaich (he): a parent paradox. And
David Schaich (he): so I already gave away the
David Schaich (he): key piece of information right going through this picture of the 3 stage process. and
David Schaich (he): showing how the
David Schaich (he): labels that we now have on the distinguishable particles can shift around and differ
David Schaich (he): in the final. We separated systems compared to the original ones that we started off.
David Schaich (he): So the key that you could see from that
David Schaich (he): is that at least in the case
David Schaich (he): of distinguishable particles
David Schaich (he): in any given distribution of particles. We have
David Schaich (he): more information. then just the
David Schaich (he): article number in a.
David Schaich (he): and then be from. We do expect.
David Schaich (he): based on les. There's this tutorial
David Schaich (he): n a prime, and it be prime to be roughly equal and equal to N.
David Schaich (he): That's dominates the number of possible microstates that we have. but for each of those distributions of particles and even number on
David Schaich (he): you saw it.
David Schaich (he): There are many ways of distributing the labels.
David Schaich (he): in addition to just the number of particles. and it's a stable that we have
David Schaich (he): only in the
David Schaich (he): and not be in the sociable one. so that gives us many more
David Schaich (he): microstates
David Schaich (he): with different labels.
David Schaich (he): and when I say more, i'm responding to more compared to
David Schaich (he): the initial cell
David Schaich (he): that the system
David Schaich (he): a plus b, that we had at first, where there was a particular labeling ABC. Dvds in that figure.
David Schaich (he): and it was a number of microstates.
David Schaich (he): as we've seen, both micro canonically and canonically
David Schaich (he): gives us larger entropy
David Schaich (he): s a prime
David Schaich (he): plus sv prime. At the end of this process
David Schaich (he): he is greater than S. A.
David Schaich (he): That is a certainly a necessary
David Schaich (he): mission, or the second law of thermodynamics to hold as we go through all stages.
David Schaich (he): it's not sufficient. We also need to check that.
David Schaich (he): It would be a Sav. S. A prime plus S. B. Prime. is
David Schaich (he): greater than the interview of the combined system. Sc. So that's
David Schaich (he): in accordance with the second of all, the entropy keeps increasing through each stage of this process as time goes on.
David Schaich (he): and it is possible to hurry out if you corrected and you were careful population
David Schaich (he): that's ends up, confirming that
David Schaich (he): is at least Fc. And possibly larger than.
David Schaich (he): and probably in this week's tutorial. On Thursday morning a few days
David Schaich (he): we will consider the
David Schaich (he): simplified case of this calculation.
David Schaich (he): where. instead of
David Schaich (he): supposing that all end particles are completely distinguishable from each other, will break up the particles into
David Schaich (he): 2 cents.
David Schaich (he): say one will set it red particles and one set of new particles that can be distinguished across those different sets, but not within each individual set.
David Schaich (he): You can see that the second law of thermodynamics holds, and that there is no paradox in general. Whenever you think you found a paradox.
David Schaich (he): and if they sign that they're simply doing something wrong.
David Schaich (he): And the question is, what which can be a very interesting way to clarify
David Schaich (he): what the proper way of analyzing these typical situations in terms of that that really is. As I said, you showed how there is no paradox or slightly unfair
David Schaich (he): that this is called a gives paradox. What we do see here in this case
David Schaich (he): is.
David Schaich (he): yeah, it's due to all of the different labels that we can have in that
David Schaich (he): final setup after we re inserted the role, and we separated systems compared to the original one. Is that
David Schaich (he): going through this process with distinguishable particles. there's essentially 0 chance. I'm getting back to
David Schaich (he): yeah
David Schaich (he): original. distinguishable system
David Schaich (he): in which we had
David Schaich (he): particular labels on particular signs of those 2 subsystems.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): what this is to say is that
David Schaich (he): this 3 saves process in this case cannot be reversed. We don't get back to where we started, so it's not like opening and closing the door between 2
David Schaich (he): gases of air made up of indistinguishable molecules.
David Schaich (he): and accordingly, to the irreversibility
David Schaich (he): of this process.
David Schaich (he): the entropy of the universe
David Schaich (he): for the interview of the system just in isolation which is part of the universe increases
David Schaich (he): as we go through all of these stages. So that is the mixing energy of the gears paradox and its resolution. No. Now move on to
David Schaich (he): the ideal gas law and start building up toward thermodynamic cycles. Are there any questions about mixing entropy or this paradox? And some of his information between distinguishable and indistinguishable particles. Before we
David Schaich (he): change gears slightly.
David Schaich (he): Not seeing any, I'll draw a line under that. and
David Schaich (he): step back to
David Schaich (he): our starting point for all of these analysis in the canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): which is the partition function.
David Schaich (he): I'll again go back to the case in this initial articles, which turns out to be a generally in general, the physically more relevant one
David Schaich (he): else
David Schaich (he): something that we can tell from the different behavior of
David Schaich (he): to or particles that most of it.
David Schaich (he): Most statistical systems, like
David Schaich (he): the air in the room.
David Schaich (he): are made up of particles that turn out to be indistinguishable. There's no way to label the oxygen molecule and distinguish it from any other.
David Schaich (he): So this has that one over factorial accounting factor V. Over Lambda cube to the power in.
David Schaich (he): and we remarked that
David Schaich (he): the dependence on the volume that feeds through to the entropy it is
David Schaich (he): something new in this
David Schaich (he): context is like, and of an ideal gas formulated in a container that we do not have see or spin systems. and as a piece of general terminology, the volume
David Schaich (he): in this expression and the entropy
David Schaich (he): is No.
David Schaich (he): As a control parameter.
David Schaich (he): It is introduced into the partition function
David Schaich (he): for all our for the micro state energies.
David Schaich (he): Yes. we declared it had to depend on that volume the possible energies that we could have before taking the limit back to continuously bearing momentum and energies.
David Schaich (he): Another example is
David Schaich (he): the external magnetic field H,
David Schaich (he): which is another example of the control for
David Schaich (he): last week and before.
David Schaich (he): And what this terminology is just saying kind of what it says on the team. Things like the volume of a gas, the external magnetic field that we apply to a spin system.
David Schaich (he): our parameters that
David Schaich (he): we imagine, at least in principle, we can't control
David Schaich (he): in an experiment which will allow us to
David Schaich (he): observe the
David Schaich (he): response to the system to changes
David Schaich (he): in these parameters, as we very
David Schaich (he): the potential complication to observing a responsible system to changes in parameters that we can control is that
David Schaich (he): there tend to be several of these parameters.
David Schaich (he): See the volume temperature external.
David Schaich (he): potentially the number of particles of practice that's a bit harder to control. And
David Schaich (he): if we want to
David Schaich (he): this entangle the response to any particular one of these control parameters. So, seeing how we behavior of our thermodynamic system.
David Schaich (he): it depends on a given control parameter
David Schaich (he): all the
David Schaich (he): others. So the other control parameters
David Schaich (he): you to be fixed and kept constant, as we
David Schaich (he): very the one that we're interested in. And we have already seen
David Schaich (he): examples
David Schaich (he): on this person. The micro canonical case. when we define the inverse temperature
David Schaich (he): to be the change in entropy
David Schaich (he): with energy, a micro canonical control parameter the energy we imagine we can adjust
David Schaich (he): you had to fix the other conserved quality in the micro canonical context and number of particles.
David Schaich (he): And similarly.
David Schaich (he): a couple of weeks ago, when we introduced the heat capacity. I mentioned that this subscript to be on the key capacity
David Schaich (he): meant that it was the heat capacity at a fixed volume. The change in the average internal entropy, and the
David Schaich (he): as we vary, the control parameter of the temperature
David Schaich (he): with the control parameter volume capture fixed.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): we can define a third quantity of this sort.
David Schaich (he): It will be
David Schaich (he): very interesting in the context of
David Schaich (he): you want to name it. Cycles.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Response in the energy.
David Schaich (he): Specifically, the internal energy and the economic ensemble
David Schaich (he): to a change in volume
David Schaich (he): that defines
David Schaich (he): the pressure of the system. call it it's actually the negative of this change. internal energy. It's the boing changes. and
David Schaich (he): we actually need to be a bit
David Schaich (he): more cautious here and swap out
David Schaich (he): the you
David Schaich (he): dependence on other control parameters in and
David Schaich (he): T. So the number of particles in the temperature
David Schaich (he): both show up in the entropy.
David Schaich (he): I've been derived last week, and I've been working with you, for example, today.
David Schaich (he): So by fixing
David Schaich (he): the entropy we get the formal statistical physics definition of the pressure.
David Schaich (he): So I change in the volume
David Schaich (he): we
David Schaich (he): entropy fix.
David Schaich (he): i'll mention in passing. I might use terminology for this
David Schaich (he): only. It is in the tropic
David Schaich (he): process. Here
David Schaich (he): the entropy goes into the isotropic part of that. and Isos is coming from the Greek word for equal. It was
David Schaich (he): the process that takes us between 2 canonical systems with a different volume, but equal entropy
David Schaich (he): and 4, you know, gases we're currently focusing on. We have seen
David Schaich (he): that the entropy s depends on
David Schaich (he): the combination
David Schaich (he): of the volume. Times. This thermal definitely the minus 3 power.
David Schaich (he): which is volume times temperature to the 3 halves.
David Schaich (he): Just next to
David Schaich (he): do you
David Schaich (he): Dependence of
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): it was like one over the square root of the temperature. so rearranging that.
David Schaich (he): or, you know, gases the condition of constant entropy
David Schaich (he): just requires this constant relation
David Schaich (he): between the volume of the system and
David Schaich (he): the 3 have power.
David Schaich (he): Oh, it's temperature.
David Schaich (he): So if we
David Schaich (he): improve this. you say that B times t to the 3 over 2 is equal to some constant. and
David Schaich (he): if I told you what to come, I would call this constant c. To the power free has.
David Schaich (he): then
David Schaich (he): I can rearrange this to find
David Schaich (he): how the temperature has to change. As we carry out this change in the control parameter of the volume and look at the response
David Schaich (he): of the average internal entropy.
David Schaich (he): So average internal energy with fixed entropy
David Schaich (he): Okay, so two-thirds power of both sides.
David Schaich (he): You saw last week that the average internal energy it's 3 halves, and T, which, if we impose, causes entry for you. means that we have it. Some constants, 3 c. Over 2
David Schaich (he): times env to the power of
David Schaich (he): sorry. This is a minus two-thirds.
David Schaich (he): divided by the on both sides
David Schaich (he): and b to the power, minus two-thirds. and then taking that derivative after having a pose.
David Schaich (he): the constant entropy condition that gets us
David Schaich (he): the expression for the energy in this form.
David Schaich (he): we have a negative sign from the derivative
David Schaich (he): house, and 3 C has comes out as this accounts to end.
David Schaich (he): Yeah derivative of D to the minus two-thirds with respect to that volume is a factor of minus two-thirds. and then
David Schaich (he): into the minus 5 thirds. We bring it down on the power of the volume from the derivative rearrange that some of those constants cancel up
David Schaich (he): we have.
David Schaich (he): and over the times that remaining, c.
David Schaich (he): To the power of the the power line is two-thirds. We can recognize as the temperature
David Schaich (he): all divided by the so we can
David Schaich (he): rearrange. To put this in a forum.
David Schaich (he): You may well have seen before
David Schaich (he): That' be pressure of the ideal Gas Times. The volume that it is in
David Schaich (he): is equal to the number of particles that is composed of multiplied by their temperature.
David Schaich (he): This is known
David Schaich (he): as the hiding the gas law. and we have derived it from
David Schaich (he): our new definition of pressure, as the isotropic response
David Schaich (he): of the internal energy to a change in the volume
David Schaich (he): of an ideal.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): it's deciding what
David Schaich (he): just whether to make any comments about what it means to change the temperature in economic ensemble. That's something I think we can put off until we get to
David Schaich (he): thermodynamic cycles and just appears
David Schaich (he): Instead, we can generalize this concept of the ideal gas law.
David Schaich (he): This is really an example, or in realization of a more general
David Schaich (he): concept. what is called
David Schaich (he): an equation of state.
David Schaich (he): So the ideal gas law is the equation of States for
David Schaich (he): a classical, non-relativistic, non-interacting ideal gas
David Schaich (he): and the state
David Schaich (he): and it is being referred to here
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): not to the microstates that we start at all.
David Schaich (he): Our derivation with our analysis is based on yeah behavior of
David Schaich (he): individual particles, microscopic degrees of freedom.
David Schaich (he): From that we are. You have to rise to large scale behavior of these systems what
David Schaich (he): we could call a macro stage rather than a microstate
David Schaich (he): for
David Schaich (he): a thermodynamic state.
David Schaich (he): So what the equations of seeds are in general. It says, we can see in the example of the ideal as well
David Schaich (he): all this
David Schaich (he): Eos.
David Schaich (he): So equations of State.
David Schaich (he): Our relations between use large scale.
David Schaich (he): macroscopic properties
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): statistical systems which emerge from the underlying dynamics of
David Schaich (he): this enormous number of the reason freedom that we have avoided dealing with explicitly
David Schaich (he): through our
David Schaich (he): the source of properties that we have in mind are things like Oh, that pressure
David Schaich (he): volume that we can see the ideal gas law of
David Schaich (he): the temperature.
David Schaich (he): even the internal energy.
David Schaich (he): So, from the complicated dynamics of
David Schaich (he): an enormous number of
David Schaich (he): degrees of freedom, typically atoms or molecules.
David Schaich (he): we have actually arrived extraordinarily simple relations between
David Schaich (he): these easily observable, easily measurable.
David Schaich (he): or to scale problems. So
David Schaich (he): you've been that sort of situation. It's natural to sort of look at the
David Schaich (he): historical development of
David Schaich (he): in the field of physics, aerodynamics, and statistical physics. And
David Schaich (he): what you may already be aware of this and historically. these relations described by the equations of things. we're observed empirically
David Schaich (he): the user
David Schaich (he): one before they could be mathematically derived from statistical physics.
David Schaich (he): You know that's the earliest example that
David Schaich (he): at least the last time one of these relations was discovered for the first time was
David Schaich (he): Robert Boyle. in the
David Schaich (he): 1,600 sixtys, who carried out experiments
David Schaich (he): where
David Schaich (he): pressure of a gas.
David Schaich (he): keeping its number of particles fixed as well as keeping it temperature fixed.
David Schaich (he): And he observed
David Schaich (he): that the product of Pressure Times volume
David Schaich (he): pressure, changed. You solve the volume changing in the opposite way.
David Schaich (he): Larger pressure produces smaller volume. Less pressure allow the system to expand, producing a larger volume.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): this relation, which certainly have been discovered by other people in other parts of the world. But
David Schaich (he): it entered the scientific literature that we still have from oil, and eventually became known as boil as well.
David Schaich (he): That's around that, just to recognize that
David Schaich (he): it wasn't something unique to to boil it. Just sort of gets the sort of credit for it
David Schaich (he): whether that's fully deserved or not. These sorts of laws at that time.
David Schaich (he): almost 400 years ago. work sort of empirical observations that
David Schaich (he): people were making and recording and cataloging about the natural world.
David Schaich (he): So this is the same
David Schaich (he): sort of wall that the first and second walls of the of the dynamics came from.
David Schaich (he): which we've also been now
David Schaich (he): able to derive from statistical physics analysis.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): over the
David Schaich (he): following: a few centuries, and especially during the Industrial Revolution.
David Schaich (he): several similar relations were down.
David Schaich (he): Problem similar sorts of experiments.
David Schaich (he): How are you out and experiments
David Schaich (he): fixing the number of particles and the pressure?
David Schaich (he): And if we then vary the temperature, we find that a water gas expands, a cooler gas contracts
David Schaich (he): the ratio of pulling the temperature.
David Schaich (he): Is it constant?
David Schaich (he): Yeah, this
David Schaich (he): it's called Charles as well.
David Schaich (he): giving credit to a fellow who is working in the right 17 properties.
David Schaich (he): I think we fix the number of particles and the volume that they are in.
David Schaich (he): and imagine heating it up or cooling it down. Then.
David Schaich (he): if the volume is not allowed to fix it, the pressure that gets
David Schaich (he): higher and higher temperatures, the pressure decreases the lower temperatures.
David Schaich (he): This okay, known as
David Schaich (he): it's the stop. So i'm not making it a serious attempt to pronounce these names correctly. It was
David Schaich (he): about 2015 years after Charles as well.
David Schaich (he): and just 10 years after that. people consider fixing the
David Schaich (he): pressure and the temperature, but varying the number of particles.
David Schaich (he): and seeing that the volume they occupied, and they fixed pressure and temperature.
David Schaich (he): varying directly with the number of particles.
David Schaich (he): This is credited historically to
David Schaich (he): the same
David Schaich (he): large number is named after.
David Schaich (he): and we can recognize that all of these relations which were initially observed it purely through experiments, are different aspects of
David Schaich (he): our ideal gas law.
David Schaich (he): You, divided by T. Is P. Divided by N.
David Schaich (he): Which was fixed
David Schaich (he): P. Divided by T. Is divided by V, which was fixed. We divided by N. It's. P. Divided by team also fixed.
David Schaich (he): You can. You can make it nice cartoon of this dividing out
David Schaich (he): T. Times in from the Pressure Times volume
David Schaich (he): you get a costing factor. unic aversion factor between units of temperature and energy which we have set equal to each other. So K. B. Equals one.
David Schaich (he): What those law from the 16 hundreds.
David Schaich (he): What's that? Pressure Times volume is a constant when temperature particle number is fixed.
David Schaich (he): and the other 3 laws
David Schaich (he): all right. Other combinations of these 4 parameters that are related
David Schaich (he): by the ideal gas or the equation of State
David Schaich (he): for ideal gases.
David Schaich (he): and it actually took a
David Schaich (he): a few decades for people to look at those
David Schaich (he): 4 or more relations between
David Schaich (he): we, those macroscopic quantities, the pressure going, temperature, and particle number, and actually realize that they could all be expressed as that single relation.
David Schaich (he): So these sorts of empirical walls
David Schaich (he): to buy into the ideal cap small
David Schaich (he): in the eighteen-
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): decades or in some cases centuries after they have been initially observed.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): you see historical credit for that.
David Schaich (he): But this is still one of these empirical laws at the level of observation rather than
David Schaich (he): fundamental mathematical derivation. and that derivation from
David Schaich (he): statistical physics, showing
David Schaich (he): probably ideally as well.
David Schaich (he): A rose is a consequence of
David Schaich (he): hypothesizing the existence of a large number of atoms or molecules in all of these gases that we're being and and experimentally studied.
David Schaich (he): That was first done.
David Schaich (he): at least in the historical record in the 1850 S. Independently by
David Schaich (he): a couple of folks currently, and I was Yes.
David Schaich (he): and that was one of the initial successes of
David Schaich (he): statistical physics, the atomic hypothesis that these gases that have been
David Schaich (he): empirically studied. how many years we're actually made up of
David Schaich (he): a large number of independent degrees of freedom called the atoms or molecules
David Schaich (he): can be analyzed the way we have been analyzing them over the past few weeks.
David Schaich (he): The mid 18 hundreds was
David Schaich (he): to the launching points for that whole enterprise of statistical physics. It was not
David Schaich (he): universally accepted as the truth for many years after that, as we discussed
David Schaich (he): just the very first lecture of the term.
David Schaich (he): But it was. This was one of the pieces of evidence showing that there was something
David Schaich (he): significant to the mathematical level in the statistical description.
David Schaich (he): Oh, okay.
David Schaich (he): macroscopic systems in terms of microscopic atomic degrees of freedom.
David Schaich (he): But one
David Schaich (he): things to know here, before
David Schaich (he): you put it into this and move on to the the next topic is
David Schaich (he): that from the initial work from the 16 hundreds.
David Schaich (he): after a sort of long price bill, there was a rapid succession of both theoretical and experimental advances starting
David Schaich (he): in the late 1,700 Isn't, going into the first half of the nineteenth century. which coincided
David Schaich (he): with the
David Schaich (he): Industrial Revolution.
David Schaich (he): and the fact that
David Schaich (he): the pace of
David Schaich (he): advances in understanding of statistical physics and physics in general accelerated during that industrial revolution
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): not a coincidence in.
David Schaich (he): I know this is maybe getting a bit
David Schaich (he): more historical than mathematical at the moment.
David Schaich (he): I think it's worth appreciating
David Schaich (he): the way that mathematical advances
David Schaich (he): and become part
David Schaich (he): of a virtuous cycle of
David Schaich (he): industrial progress, combined with insight into the the mathematics
David Schaich (he): that is
David Schaich (he): underlying, or at the heart of all of the
David Schaich (he): applications, that. or driving the economy.
David Schaich (he): And this is a virtuous cycle that continues today in different forms. Many of them centered around computing data science. It was like you explored in that computer project
David Schaich (he): back in the 18 hundreds that was
David Schaich (he): not always under consideration.
David Schaich (he): You might know that one of the drivers of industrial progress.
David Schaich (he): the automation and construction of factories
David Schaich (he): and replacement of human labor. With machine labor was the development of
David Schaich (he): various sorts of efficient engines that could convert
David Schaich (he): if they could do productive things, productive work out of
David Schaich (he): energy.
David Schaich (he): So it's connecting to some of the topics that we have been discussing, and will, in fact, be
David Schaich (he): our next major application of economical ensemble to
David Schaich (he): key engines. thermodynamic cycles that can take
David Schaich (he): keep to internal energy and use it to do work
David Schaich (he): on the surroundings. So you have Yeah, another
David Schaich (he): 1015min today to get started building up toward the thermodynamic cycles of heat engines.
David Schaich (he): Before doing so i'll pause briefly to see if there are questions about the ideal gas law.
David Schaich (he): or or any of this historical stuff. And one
David Schaich (he): consider whether everything is clear. I will say, just be wary that
David Schaich (he): this sort of
David Schaich (he): superficial history is.
David Schaich (he): you know, like gross simplification of what was actually going on.
David Schaich (he): The true story is
David Schaich (he): much more complicated and much more interesting, and is reflected by
David Schaich (he): decades, long gaps between a lot of these relations that
David Schaich (he): you know we can see as sort of immediate consequences of statistical physics that we understand today. It was in the process of
David Schaich (he): being figured out. and it
David Schaich (he): I should not get the impression that it was a
David Schaich (he): straightforward
David Schaich (he): marked a trial by the people who I have names here I can get credit for
David Schaich (he): publishing things in their final form, as they've come down to us today.
David Schaich (he): so enough about history, less get back to economical ensemble. and
David Schaich (he): next to me. pressure that we have just to find the isentropic response of the internal energy of a canonical system to a change in this volume.
David Schaich (he): We have this idea from everyday experience of pressure as
David Schaich (he): Hey.
David Schaich (he): through the mechanical properties.
David Schaich (he): Okay, alluded to when discussing these past laws.
David Schaich (he): So in deriving, I've got those small.
David Schaich (he): Okay. increasing the pressure. Sorry
David Schaich (he): Looking at the socks, and we increase the pressure on a gas. We saw that temperature rose. We have the idea that
David Schaich (he): increasing the pressure.
David Schaich (he): squeezing some application of the force
David Schaich (he): to the system, a mechanical process that we want to
David Schaich (he): ensure that our
David Schaich (he): statistical physics definition in terms of a response function is
David Schaich (he): wide with it, makes sense in terms of the chemical processes that we may be more familiar with in the context of
David Schaich (he): pressure.
David Schaich (he): So we can do this connection by
David Schaich (he): relate the pressure to the work that is done by a force.
David Schaich (he): So i'll call that force. Yeah. say that it is defined at some position are both of those are vectors in three-dimensional space. X, Y. And Z.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): the definition of the work that is done by a force calling back to something hopefully. You seen possibly many years ago
David Schaich (he): on that force
David Schaich (he): changes the
David Schaich (he): energy of an object
David Schaich (he): at that position are by just placing it by some small shift
David Schaich (he): which I call. and if it accessible, Dr. And if an accessible 3, vector so at the infinitesimal.
David Schaich (he): and it's definitely the work that is done. the infinitesimal change in energy.
David Schaich (he): the inner product of
David Schaich (he): 4 times this
David Schaich (he): displacement. So we get a
David Schaich (he): simple number out of the dot product with those 2 vectors
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): for macroscopic forces and the changes in
David Schaich (he): position this generalizes to
David Schaich (he): the work being equal to the overall change in energy as we integrate
David Schaich (he): along the displacement dotted into the force that is applied as a function of that position.
David Schaich (he): So this is
David Schaich (he): line integral. It traces all Chris's out the path
David Schaich (he): of that product. Taking me in inner product. so traces the path of the object, taking the inner product at every point.
David Schaich (he): just to
David Schaich (he): consider it a simple example not connected to statistical physics, but something may well have seen in the past to recall this way of looking at
David Schaich (he): work in force and energy.
David Schaich (he): which is still a set statistical physics assigned for a couple of minutes. And look at the example of a single object.
David Schaich (he): Again, it falls
David Schaich (he): due to the force of gravity
David Schaich (he): which we can represent as
David Schaich (he): a force that is pointing downward in the Z direction
David Schaich (he): equal to the mass of the object times. The gravitational cost 9.8 meters per second squared negative slide, indicating that it's parting downward.
David Schaich (he): So if we
David Schaich (he): start this object
David Schaich (he): at rest, which
David Schaich (he): means that it's initial kinetic energy is just 0.
David Schaich (he): I of H.
David Schaich (he): Then the
David Schaich (he): vital energy here that we have
David Schaich (he): it is just going to be equal to that work that is done on the particle by the force of gravity as it falls.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, work. Remember the change in
David Schaich (he): energy. So
David Schaich (he): the final energy minus the initial energy initial energy. Here is 0,
David Schaich (he): and we have it
David Schaich (he): a fairly simple dot product and line integral integral to compute
David Schaich (he): the X and Y components all drop out.
David Schaich (he): We have an energy that an object that starts with some type age. Let it fall. It just drops down
David Schaich (he): to the ground down the height 0,
David Schaich (he): and we pull out a minus
David Schaich (he): Mg. From the force.
David Schaich (he): and then have the integral from height, page down to 0. Just of
David Schaich (he): the are the Z. That direction which is.
David Schaich (he): which is about the simplest integral you can do. There's a negative sign just from the order of integration limits.
David Schaich (he): so we find that the final energy is Mass Times Gravitational Constants Times, the initial heights started from, which is a positive number
David Schaich (he): that corresponds to the positive momentum for momentum in the z component
David Schaich (he): that the object has. Once it hits the ground at height, 0. So the energy
David Schaich (he): Mg. H equals
David Schaich (he): momentum squared over 2. You can solve that for the momentum or the velocity
David Schaich (he): that the we'll mention
David Schaich (he): at the end of this process is pointing downward. When we take the square root we get the positive and negative roots. We know that the object is moving downward from the setup.
David Schaich (he): and this minus M Times Twog. H is
David Schaich (he): Hey, you famous results for the momentum of a polling object. Yes. you probably have seen before. You may not be called it after the number of years that have passed.
David Schaich (he): So that is just a reminder of how work and energy are connected.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): we will wrapped up by coming back to
David Schaich (he): statistical systems
David Schaich (he): with some large number of particles.
David Schaich (he): We define the work that is done
David Schaich (he): to the change in internal energy that we get
David Schaich (he): to be response to that internal energy.
David Schaich (he): Do
David Schaich (he): 2 Air force.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): you've seen a few ways that the internal energy can't change. If we specifically consider applying the force to a statistical system, what that is going to do in general is
David Schaich (he): change. One control parameter in particular
David Schaich (he): force. We can expect to change the volume of the system. and just to illustrate
David Schaich (he): what you have in mind.
David Schaich (he): If we imagine an ideal gas in the container that
David Schaich (he): is, at some number of particles with a fixed temperature team.
David Schaich (he): we let one of the walls of this container the
David Schaich (he): a moveable piston that we apply
David Schaich (he): that force F 2. It will shifts
David Schaich (he): over by some amount to the X in that direction.
David Schaich (he): It reduces the volume by the area
David Schaich (he): of that wall which we can call a.
David Schaich (he): So. The change in going in is that area a times change in X.
David Schaich (he): It is negative, because the volume gets smaller. and we assume that this is
David Schaich (he): so isentropically. The entropy is
David Schaich (he): conserved. so that we can connect this to
David Schaich (he): the our definition of the pressure.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): pulling these things together, the work that is done by this force changing the volume of this canonical system. That is
David Schaich (he): hmm. The change in
David Schaich (he): the movement of this object. The change in the volume is parallel to the force.
David Schaich (he): So that's
David Schaich (he): in your product. Just simplifies to
David Schaich (he): F. Times Delta. X. We've said that this is a change in the internal energy.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, it is
David Schaich (he): greater than 0.
David Schaich (he): So it greater than 0, because the force and the change in X are parallel. They are online.
David Schaich (he): So what we have is
David Schaich (he): the internal energy
David Schaich (he): increasing by the Force Times displacement and the increase in energy It's due to
David Schaich (he): the volume decreasing in that same process.
David Schaich (he): So Delta V is
David Schaich (he): a Delta X with a minus sign.
David Schaich (he): What we can do is plug that into
David Schaich (he): our statistical definition of the pressure as a change in energy due to a change in the volume with fixed entropy. Yeah, the overall negative sign. The energy increases
David Schaich (he): by F. Delta X.
David Schaich (he): The volume decreases by it. minus in Delta X negative signs, and to access cancel off. And from our statistical physics definition
David Schaich (he): we I've seen it
David Schaich (he): the result of the pressure. It is the force
David Schaich (he): per unit area
David Schaich (he): which is being exerted on
David Schaich (he): the surface of the container. That yes.
David Schaich (he): so we can
David Schaich (he): see that
David Schaich (he): that there is a connection between the work F. Delta X. And the pressure.
David Schaich (he): I to the Executive here. and we will pick up tomorrow afternoon by rearranging this expression and interpreting pressure in terms of work as it first step forward
David Schaich (he): studying thermodynamic cycles. Wrap up here for
David Schaich (he): today just one last call to see if there are
David Schaich (he): any questions about the initial setup that we have connecting this pressure to it's mechanical idea of work being done by
David Schaich (he): changing the energy due to applying an external force.
David Schaich (he): So it looks like this is something you're all happy with. You Have a office hours now, and a chance tomorrow to
David Schaich (he): about this, if anything appears questionable.
David Schaich (he): But I will let you go
David Schaich (he): for now and see you tomorrow afternoon.